# Nios II CLI Without WSL or Eclipse

This guide will show you how to use the Nios II CLI, and create/run Nios II C projects on Windows **without WSL or Eclipse**.

## Prerequisites

* Windows (duh)
* Quartus Prime Lite (if you have a version other than `21.1` you will need to modify one of the utility scripts, see "Gotchas" below)
* A `bash` terminal

## Setup

1. Clone this repository
2. Add the `Utilities` directory to `%PATH`
3. When you want to start a Nios II CLI session, open a Bash terminal and run `nios2-cli`

## Gotchas

* **You may have to modify the `Utilities/nios2-cli` script if your Nios II installation directory is not `C:\intelFPGA_lite\21.1\nios2eds\`. See lines 3-4 of the `nios2-cli` script.**

* **Whenever specifying a directory path in a command, it is best to always use relative paths to avoid compatibility issues between Linux and Windows path formats. Additionally, a lot of the Nios II tools can't handle whitespace in paths because whoever made them wants to watch the world burn.**

## Using the Nios II CLI

### Creating a BSP (Board Support Package)

You will need a `.sopcinfo` file that describes your Nios II system. This is produced by Platform Designer (Qsys).

* In a Nios II CLI session, run `nios2-bsp {bspType} {bspDir} {sopcFile}` where `bspType` is `hal` or `ucosii` depending on if you are running on bare metal or if you want to use μC/OS-II (respectively), `bspDir` is the directory to create the BSP in, and `sopcFile` is the path to your `.sopcinfo` file.

* Then run `nios2-fixbsp {bspDir}`, where `bspDir` is the directory in which you created the BSP in the previous step. This fixes a bug in the default makefile, I'm not sure why the bug happens.

I recommend writing a bash script that will perform these two steps for you, as you do **not** want to check the BSP into VCS.

### Creating a new project / Adding new files to an existing project / Generating a Makefile

The key step to either of these tasks is to generate the `Makefile`. The `Makefile` is very big, however, so I recommend not checking it into VCS and instead writing a script that will generate it

Create a bash script that runs `nios2-app-generate-makefile --bsp-dir {bspDir} --src-dir .` where `bspDir` is your BSP directory. This will add all files in the current directory to the `Makefile`. To specify additional source directories, add `--src-dir {dir}` or `--src-files {file1} {file2}` command line flags.

Run it in a Nios II CLI session in the project directory.

### Creating a project from an example

You will need a BSP. See above for how to create a BSP.

* Create a project directory

* The examples are located in `{nios2dir}/examples/software/` where `nios2dir` is your Nios II installation directory. Usually this is `C:\intelFPGA_lite\{version}\nios2eds`, but yours might be different.

* Each example has a directory. Choose an example, copy its contents to your project directory and delete `template.xml`.

* Now follow the instructions for creating a new project.

### Compiling a project

In a Nios II CLI session in your project directory, run `make`. This will generate an `.elf` file in the project directory.

### Programming

In a Nios II CLI session, run `nios2-download -g {elfFile}` where `elfFile` is the ELF file generated by compiling the project.

### Connecting to the JTAG UART

In a Nios II CLI session, run `nios2-terminal`.

## Setup explanation

Normally, Eclipse IDE is required to use the Nios II tools. However, I ~~hate~~ ~~loathe~~ ~~detest~~ **DESPISE** Eclipse. Therefore I have developed the following CLI methods to avoid using it.

You're supposed to install WSL. However, I don't want to. So I won't. This guide shows you how to get the tools working without WSL.

The normal start menu shortcut to start a Nios II CLI session won't work - it will complain that WSL isn't installed.

There is a script in the `Utilities` directory that initializes a Nios II CLI session in the current Bash window. **You must add the `Utilities` directory to PATH** so that you can just run `nios2-cli` in any Bash window to start a Nios II CLI session. This also makes the other included utilities available.

You can also run any Nios II command directly using the script. For example, to start a Nios II terminal, run `nios2-cli nios2-terminal` outside of a Nios II CLI session, and it will start a session and run the command `nios2-terminal`. When the terminal session ends, the script will terminate, instead of leaving you in a Nios II CLI session.
